---
layout: post
title: Generalized Linear Models
author: ThinkCat23
date: Jan 25 2021
comments: true
mathjax: true
categories: [Stat Method]

---
GLMs are a class of nonlinear regression models.
## Structure

### Random Model Component
 The conditional distribution that response variable $$\{Y_i: i=1,...,n\}$$ follows given parameter.\
eg. Exponential dispersion family $$f(y|\theta_i)= \exp \{\phi(y\theta_i-b(\theta_i))+c(y, \theta_i)\}$$, different $$\theta_i$$s and fixed $$\phi$$ makes a collection of exponential dispersion families.\
Dispersion family has the properties: $$E(Y_i)=b'(\theta_i)=\mu_i, Var(Y_i)=\phi^{-1}b''(\theta_i)=\phi^{-1}V(\mu_i)$$, where $$V(\mu_i)$$ is the variance function determined by the random model component.\
Some common variance functions: $$V(\mu_i)=\phi^{-1}\mu_i^\theta$$,\
Normal $$\theta=0$$,\
Possion $$\theta=1$$\
Gamma $$\theta=2$$,\
Inverse Guassian $$\theta=3$$.\
The mean-variance relationship can be used to select the random model component.

### Systematic Model Component
The relationship between the mean of $$Y_i$$ and covariate $$x_i$$ through **link function** $$g(\mu_i)=x_i'\beta = \eta_i$$, where $$\eta_i=x_i'\beta$$ is the **linear predictor**.\
**Canonical link** $$g(b'(\theta_i))=\theta_i$$, or equivalently $$g(\mu_i)=b'^{-1}(\mu_i)$$.\
A link function should map $$\mu_i$$ to the entire real line, unless we restrict $$x_i$$ and $$\beta$$.\
log link $$g(\mu_i)=\log(\mu_i)$$\
power link $$g(\mu_i)=\mu_i^\lambda$$\
complimentary log-log link $$g(\mu_i)=\log[-\log(1-\mu_i)]$$\
power family $$g(\mu_i,\lambda)=\frac{\mu_i^\lambda-1}{\lambda}$$\
eg. Possion $$f(y_i|\theta_i)=\exp\{y_i\theta_i-\exp(\theta_i)-\log(y_i!)\}$$, then $$\mu_i=b'(\theta_i)=\exp(\theta_i)$$, the canonical link is $$g(\exp(\theta_i))=\theta_i$$, thus $$g(.)=\log(.)$$.

## Model Selection
GLM specifies the distribution of response variable. If the distribution is not of interest, we may not consider fitting a GLM.
### Random
**Box-Cox plot**
- Sort $$Y_i$$, cut into 5/10/20 groups, calculate sample mean and standard deviation for each group.
``` r
groupY = cut(y, breaks = quantile(y, prob =c(0, seq(0.1, 1, by = 0.1))), include.lowest = TRUE)
groupMean = tapply(y, groupY, mean)
groupSD = tapply(y, groupY, sd)
```
- Fit a line for the log of standard deviation of each group against the log of the mean of each group. According to the variance function, $$\log(SD)=1/2\log(\phi^{-1})+\frac{\theta}{2}\log(\mu_i)$$. So the slope of the fitted line is an estimation of $$\frac{\theta}{2}$$.
### Systematic
